Rich, Michael, welcome to Talk Python To Me. Great to have you two here.
Hey, thanks for having us.
Great to be here.
Yeah. It's a pretty interesting topic, these tables.
You know, when I first heard about it, I was like, I was like, you know, it sounds interesting,
but how are we going to talk about tables on the podcast?
And, you know, how much is it really to talk about with tables?
Turns out there's a lot and we're going to find a way to talk about it on the podcast.
So it's a pretty deep topic.
There's so much.
You're going to need two hours.
And honestly, like what you said just now is like story of my life for the past year of like being like what what could tables do?
Like, yeah, I mean, df.head doesn't that just solve it?
Come on.
Right.
We already got that.
We already live.
It's already so perfect.
How could we improve on that?
But yeah, I'm really excited because this is me kind of like fanning over Rich, but like I think it's like the perfect way to frame it.
Like what's up with tables?
I feel like having pulled that thread for the last year, I'm always excited to talk about these things here because like I don't even be able to recapture how freaked out I am by whatever I just experienced for the past year with tables.
That Rich is shipping away at is really exciting.
Tables.
you know what i i would say probably my impression which i will grant you is a pretty fresh take on
this it's a little bit like oh well we already got excel you can draw graphs with excel
or alt hair plotly those types of you know it's oh wait there's there's actually a lot more we
could do that's pretty awesome yeah we have language too i feel like having discovered
there's a whole vocabulary for tables I feel like was really enlightening.
Yeah, I would think so.
There's almost like design patterns of tables.
I want to get into that and like structure and some history and many things.
But as per usual, before we jump into that,
let's get a little bit of background on you guys.
Maybe a quick introduction on the two of you,
how you got motivated to get into working with great tables and that sort of thing.
Yeah. Rich, you want to?
Yeah. So I'm rich. How do you get into tables? I mean,
I had to make tons of them. So that was sort of a necessity.
So the problem was it was annoying to do like really annoying.
Either doing a word was repetitive, you know, not reproducible,
which kind of annoying me. I had to redo tables all the time because we had to
use a tool that was outside of like programming, right?
That was like a major problem, actually.
You had to re-transcribe them.
There was many of them.
It was kind of bleh.
So I swore.
Like kind of like I opened with, you could automate the graphs, but you couldn't automate
the tables, right?
Exactly.
Yes.
It was like the one last thing.
So that was like where I came from with tables.
And years later, I finally got to it.
better later than ever.
Yeah, yeah.
I came in mostly to support Rich.
So a lot of what I've done is work as like a data scientist in R and Python.
And I've always kind of had a split, been kind of split brain.
So doing a lot of data analysis in R and more engineering tasks in Python.
But I think as I noticed, Rich was kind of bringing this table idea to Python
I talked with him a bit and then I peeked through the code he was working on and I was sort of really intrigued by how much was there.
Like, I would say the first thing that really kind of surprised me is just how much code he had was just more than I kind of thought tables would need.
And so.
This is more than one file.
I mean, come on.
don't we just put out a header and put out the rows it was no there's a lot going on here for
people who are not familiar with this yeah right i surprised myself too with how much i wrote i mean
it just kept snowballing the amount of things that had to be done yeah i'm sure and we did we both
came from um academics so we both did phds and i think we both produced like a decent number of
tables as we did that um but yeah never never quite dove as deep into them or as intricate
yeah and probably most of the time you know you're knocking out something in excel or latex or
something like that yeah well that's done it's kind of done it's not not live in the sense like
every day i want a new tabular view of the status or you know whatever like the dashboard sort of
What were your PhDs in?
I did chemistry, of all things.
I love chemistry.
Organic chemistry was one of my favorite courses I ever did in college.
I loved it too.
Organic was great.
Yeah, beautiful.
And I know very little about chemistry.
I did cognitive psychology.
Okay.
Tables in the mind or something.
I don't know.
Something like that.
Yeah, absolutely.
That's cool.
So you must have had a lot of experience with trying to present your research and your thesis and stuff through tables, right?
Yeah, big time.
I think it counted something like 100 tables, including the raw data section.
So yeah, no shortage of tables there.
And a lot of it came up with presentations and stuff.
Had to remake them.
Again, no good tool.
So I was like, I felt like, I felt sad, but I had no time to like pursue a tool.
So I just kept going.
Yeah.
I kind of picked up too, as I started working with Rich, that he's a supreme dabbler.
Like he has collected tables from across the world in a lot of different domains.
So that's, that's one thing that caught me too, was like, I don't doubt he produced a
lot of chemistry tables, but I was amazed that I felt like he was like a guy in an alleyway
trying to like sell me tables.
Like, oh, you like a sports table?
He's like, oh, you like basketball?
You know, you like.
Yeah, the first the first brackets free and then.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Yeah, it kind of is like that.
Yeah.
Try to make tables possible for everybody, you know?
Yeah. So how do we kick this off?
We got to, I just want to say to all the listeners who are not watching the YouTube live stream,
but are just listening like most people who listen to the show do.
We're going to do our best to describe some of these things.
Some of them are visual, but I think we can pretty much capture the essence of them.
I will try to set up chapters and put some chapter art.
So keep an eye on your podcast player or your CarPlay view of now playing or whatever it is that's playing the thing.
It might show some pictures.
We'll see what we can do with that.
But let's start off the conversation here, not on great tables exactly, but maybe just some examples of some good tables to give people a sense of just, you know, what more could you possibly do than just, you know, data frame dot header.
something to that effect you know what i mean um so i think it was rich he sent this over
yeah what do you guys said a visualization gallery from andrew weatherman and includes him
it has got some awesome tables and the person yeah they're and they're uh 10 tutorials here
and they're a lot of them are based on um code a lot of them from r and stuff like that but which
Which one do you think we should talk about, just as an introductory example, maybe?
Pretty good one is the first one.
The very first.
It leads with a table at the very top of the page.
So the conference realignment travel.
Yeah, if we open this table up, there's pictures.
So this talks about, what is this, basketball college, American basketball?
Yeah.
So you've got the logo or the icon, you know, like the Stanford tree or the Miami, Florida U, which is like the school colors.
And you've got little chiclets of the information.
Those are also embedded in sort of a heat map.
There's a lot more that there's a lot of pieces of this conveying information all at the same time.
You want to maybe just riff on that a little bit?
Yeah, I don't mind trying to tackle this table.
I'm just taking it in.
I think I think it's really nice.
So this table.
Yeah, basketball realignment travel in the ACC.
So they're talking about, I guess, how hard would it be for these teams to drive to games?
And so in the table, every row is a team.
And they use like the logos next to the team name.
So it's really fast to look up.
And then in the columns are things about like, yeah, visiting arena to home arena.
So like how many miles would it take for this team to travel to the arenas they're going to?
And I think that what's nice about this table is, for example, there are multiple measures of how many miles it would take a given team to go to their visiting arenas.
So, for example, on the first row, we have California.
And in columns, we have like median miles for one column and average miles for another column.
But I think what's nice about just kind of basic table structure is because these two columns, medium miles and average miles, are both kind of about a similar thing.
They're able to put a label over it called a column spanner, and they label it visiting arena to home arena.
So they're able to do a little bit of grouping of information.
So you can see like these two measures, these two columns are related to each other.
And then I like.
Michael, that's a super interesting point that I think is very well represented in great tables.
And that is almost multidimensional data.
Yeah.
Right.
And so, like you say, it's got three columns here, median miles, average miles, and then this other geographic center column.
But above those, there's like groupings.
these two columns speak to how far is the visiting an arena from home versus the other one is just
sort of an extra description, right? So you're able to say, here's this axis of information,
but you can really group them together and think of them as something else it's representing almost
or something combined, like a projection. I don't know, something like this.
Yeah, totally. And I think the interesting thing too is like in databases or in data analysis,
This kind of structure is there, but it's not visual oftentimes.
Like someone might have a table and they might have two columns, one for like median miles, average miles.
But they might actually like oftentimes people in the name will put the grouping.
So like if those two columns are related, they might say like visiting, you know, prefix it with like visiting underscore.
And so it's interesting, like tables, raw data tables often have these hierarchies, but this kind of lets you pull it out visually.
So like the human eye can quickly kind of group things.
And then to your point about multidimensional, that is kind of like one of the big benefits of a table is that this, for example, this table has three columns related to miles.
And a plot, you could show that in a plot.
You could plot two columns against each other with a scatter plot
and maybe use the third column another way through like color or size.
But at that point, you've kind of maxed out the plot.
There's not a lot more you can do.
A table, you can just keep adding columns
and they don't even have to be numeric or like kind of on the same scale.
You could add like all kinds of information in columns
and keep going.
And I think to your point of it being multidimensional,
that's one kind of nice thing table support
is many measures on the columns.
Yeah, absolutely.
Out of the audience, Carol points out that the ACC
used to be mostly Southern-based,
but now they span the whole US.
But what you can see from this chart is all,
or this table rather, that all the,
all the Southeast based universities have a much easier time,
right there.
The color of their little chiclets of distance are all very light colored.
Whereas if you look at all the California West coast, you know,
it's like distance across the U S is your average distance.
You travel to each game. Right. And it's pretty wild.
You could probably put in things like what is the team's typical winning outcome based by distance, right?
If it has to play a team that is twice as far away, is it more likely to show up?
Are the players more likely to show up tired and not quite be able to play as good?
And then that might somehow affect the rankings just based where you physically are located.
Yeah, I think this is a good table because like it basically tries to get that slice of the data, right? That one view of the data and present it so nicely and then you can.
Cause you to think those things right to to explore. Yeah, yeah, exactly. I don't know what I would have even thought that before. Yeah. Yeah. But looking at the colors, you're like, oh, California, as in Berkeley and Stanford.
And those types of schools, they're much darker versus, you know, Louisville, which is not very much or Duke or all these other teams.
And then you start to realize, oh, maybe distance does play an important role.
It just jumps right out, even though this is not a thing that I think about or care very much about on a lot of levels.
you know yeah and even to michael's point that last column is like a total like qualitative measure
or not well it's quantitative but it's basically just like a it's like a label rather than like a
number essentially so like it could it's much easier in a plot i don't even know how you would
do that you just yeah i guess but here you can just to describe the last column is you're talking
about like furthest so the last column shows what's the furthest team from so each row is a team
the last column is essentially what's the furthest team from you and they're able to just put a logo
in to get a quick kind of snapshot and on that extra column basically if you were to play an away
game at that team that's the worst travel for you it's at least measured by distance it's not like
by time and you know like if you're taking a flight you could have three connections to a small town
versus a direct one that's far away right like there's there's different metrics you might apply
what defines Fertilist, but yeah, it's a neat idea.
Yeah, it's interesting though, right?
Because they even bother to rewrite the name of that team.
They just economize the space and just threw it in
in case you're interested.
Yeah, and the value for that column
is not the name of the school, it's the school logo.
Yeah.
And I will say, I can't believe that the year is 2024
and we just had a five-minute discussion
on the design of a single,
I didn't imagine myself being here a year ago,
but it's really-
It's a big problem, isn't it?
I'm telling you about it to me.
Yeah.
Amazing.
I feel like Edward Tufte
must come into existence a lot for you guys.
But it kind of goes to show tables can be cool, right?
Like we're actually talking about this table
and it's interesting.
And it's good to look at.
And like, I don't know.
Like, this is like a leisure thing.
I'm not compelled to look at this.
Yeah.
I'm looking at this for fun.
And like, it actually is okay.
I enjoy looking at this table.
Yeah.
I'll pull one more down.
I have no idea what I'm going to be getting here.
But let's do Spotify listening.
How long do I listen to my top artists before skipping?
Yeah.
I think to your Tufte point too, this is a good example that you can have.
You can have a little bar chart inside your table.
So like this table, how long do I listen to my top artists before skipping?
Each row is an artist with some information about them.
And then the big thing, it sounds like, is this average stream duration column, which has a bar of how long people stream them on average, maybe before skipping.
Yeah, I love your point about Tufte, like this idea that you can encode a small graph, like visual, like a bar is very, I think Tufte, like with sparklines and things like that.
Tables can have a really compact representation that bring in some of the value of charts.
But also, it's like three quarters table, one quarter chart.
And that's kind of complex.
For those out there who don't are not steeped in Edward Tufte sort of lore, he's a guy who thinks very deeply about data presentation, not necessarily tables or graphs or whatever, but just I have a bunch of kind of data stats based information.
And how could I possibly present this in the way that conveys the most information easiest?
So on.
So yeah, he's got some great books, some great presentations out there.
That's why I brought it up because his whole career is about how do you present data, basically, right?
Anything you guys should add to that?
What do you think?
I think there is a – I don't have it on hand.
There is a quote, I think, from Tufte.
I don't want to butcher about – there is some analysis he's done of tables of like your entry architecture or something,
which is essentially like the structure of the table where you enter it as a
user. And then like how you read usually determines your like orientation.
So like if you're, if you're reading left to right,
there's usually like the table structure has like an entry point.
And then if you're reading left to right,
it kind of determines how you're going to go through.
He's done some thinking about tables as sort of architectures, I think,
but I haven't, I haven't gone too deep into it.
Me neither, but I guess that informs like things like sorting that we saw
on the other tables. Like there's a dominant sort,
the most important things are at the top, maybe least important,
but there's, there's definitely some sort of like, you know,
like conscious sorting and like, it's obvious what it is.
And it's just to serve a purpose.
Yeah.
There's probably an art to finding the thing that attracts your attention
first. And so then as you progress through looking at it, you can do so in a deterministic,
purposeful way rather than just, you know, you land anywhere and you start looking around visually.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's wild because like it is such a,
such a creative act making a table. It seems weird to say it. It's not just results. You just
slap down. You have to envision yourself in the viewer's shoes and like how to,
how they would ingest or like digest information in the most easiest manner
possible.
With all sorts of like little affordances,
like the way you format things,
um,
space in between columns,
all sorts of wild little tiny details.
They all really combine to like make something really good or to make the
table shine.
I guess you can say.
Yeah,
absolutely.
I want to come back to this one about the,
the listening.
Um,
And I'll link to all these in the show notes, of course.
Here we've got the average stream duration,
and it's represented by little bars in the table itself,
which we've already talked about, which is awesome.
And the values are things like 87%, 80%, 84%, whatever.
That little section is fraught with possible misrepresentations.
So if that was just a number and it was average seconds,
Well, if you listen to, say, the Scorpions or some of the older rock bands or Iron Maiden, I don't know, where they have songs that are like seven or eight minutes long versus more modern songs that are maybe two and a half minutes long.
And it said, hey, look, I only listen to these like two and a half minutes, but I listen to the Scorpions for three minutes.
That must be the winner, right?
Like, no, you're not even listening close to the same amount.
So putting numbers even before you would normalize them,
just put them as a percent of that,
as the total average of the song or something.
There's a lot to think about with these things.
And that can kind of go away with these graphs.
You don't have to worry about that.
You don't have to worry about how long is their average song.
You can see just how long did I listen to their stuff.
It's kind of cool.
Yeah, it's really cool.
And it's a great use of space too, right?
horizontal bar plot. I mean, these are like rows which are not that high, but you still fit a plot
in. We don't have that many choices, but horizontal bar plot. Yeah, they could be just a couple pixels
high and you can still see that kind of information super well, as long as you use enough color or
whatever. All right. Well, let's talk about great tables. So I feel like we probably have set the
stage well enough for people to go,
okay, maybe there's something here rather than just header rows and columns.
So tell us about Great Tables.
When did it come into existence?
Why do you guys build it? What is it?
Rich, you want to get it?
Yeah, sure.
So actually started from our program or package a long time ago back in 2018.
And like there's like essentially like a list of projects that were sort of like I'm not being handled at our at then our studio now posit and tables was there was like oh this seems like such an obvious one.
I will take that I will work on that and I have an interest in that.
I'm going to do it.
Nobody else did it.
It was on that list for years.
And it kind of begs the question like why because tables are such omnipresent you know way of presenting data.
I see it in journal articles.
Half the things are tables, half the things are plots.
And they're everywhere else.
So yeah, there should be this thing.
So I decided to just get going on that.
And as Michael said, it's a lot of code.
And I didn't envision it would take that much code.
I thought it'd be rather simple working with HTML table
and then expanding towards other types of table outputs
like a PDF, you know, Word and stuff like that.
But I thought, you know, those would be bite-sized little things.
As it turns out, tables run pretty deep.
And I really only found that out when looking at,
I was doing some like literature review,
and I found that 1949 census manual.
It's like the review of tabular presentation.
Yeah, it's a great PDF that lives on the internet.
It's always there.
Thanks, whoever put that out.
What year is this from?
1949.
1949, yeah.
It's like a janky scanned-in thing.
They don't align, but it's amazing.
This is like hundreds of pages of table stuff.
It's both a style guide for the census at the time
and also just like an amazing reference for anything tables.
And even just presenting data.
They go so deep on the smallest little things.
It's incredible.
Yeah, they sketch things out.
They give things names.
that was super important because otherwise he'd just be saying that area on the top left whatever
that is yeah it's good to have almost like design patterns for for that right yes yeah this is what
was needed and i'm very thankful i found this otherwise we'd have to make it up but this seems
like as close to a standard as we'll ever find on this sort of thing on making tables right from 1942
we have the formal table and its major parts continued you know amazing yeah they did and
much good text like it's expertly written um this stuff i mean of course these are tables in print
and of course we have the web so that changes things a little bit but you'd be kind of surprised
how how uh you know still relevant these recommendations are they teach you to be
economical with how much day you put on how basically the tufty thing how much ink are you
going to like spend on a visualization and um it just carries it through to all the different parts
which is amazing.
And we took a lot of that and applied to here as best as we could,
with some more modern things as well.
Yeah, of course.
But it's pretty much a very useful reference,
like the foundational reference for this.
So right on the great tables page,
you've got the components of a table.
You want to give us a sense of what's beyond header rows and columns?
Yeah, Michael, would you?
Sure.
Yeah, I think so.
I mean, I think even just the very first thing at the top, this table header with a title
and a subtitle, that seems like a really simple thing, but I think that it's easy to overlook.
Like a lot of people think of a table as just the data and maybe some labels, but if you
think about the information hierarchy and someone who has maybe 10 seconds, five seconds to figure
out what's going on as it turns out the title is probably the most one of the most important parts
because it tells them in two seconds what should i expect from this thing so like if you send to
your boss a table if you had to do one thing you should probably put a title on it so that they know
what you're sending to them and i think so that's like maybe a silly thing maybe it feels like
table stakes but i think like the title and the subtitle are small elements that really kind of
if you're thinking of a table as communication um you you wouldn't write an article without a title
um so this really is just probably wouldn't put a graph up without a title right right so it's
kind of bringing tables up to the standard of other communications and then i think um
And the other thing I really like is these are really simple elements, but these footnotes on the bottom and source notes, this idea that if you just create a spot for your like references, it's a lot easier to get into the habit of referencing where things came from.
So like we have some table examples in our gallery and they in their footnotes, they often say where we got them from.
And it's just so so helpful having that like hook that you can hang into to quickly like as a quick reminder that if you like if you make it easy to put your references in footnotes, you know, you just can make a habit of it.
So those are kind of funny. Those are like the bookends of a table. But I really appreciate that they're there to emphasize how critical they are if tables are a form of communication.
Yeah. The one that stood out to me and I called out at the first table we talked about was the spanner label that kind of says these three columns are kind of in some category together.
Yeah, that hierarchy is pretty important.
It lets you sort of like, oh yeah, I care about this package of, or this set of columns, or maybe I don't, maybe I care about these ones over here.
You just quickly get oriented to like the columns that, you know, are more useful.
And also it allows you to do that thing that Michael mentioned before.
You don't have to like have tons of like label on the below columns, like on one label or tons of text on one label.
You can split it up between like Spanner and then like the things that it's associated to, you know, the columns.
So you might have things like some type of measure and then like the units for the column
labels, for instance.
Yeah.
In our basketball example, it could be distance from visiting arena.
They could just have average or miles from visiting arena and then just average and median.
And that's all it has to say.
But you wouldn't have average and median as column.
Unless it was really, really clear.
But in a complicated thing, it wouldn't make sense to just have those two words like average
or what, you know?
Yeah.
part of that visualization thoughtful design that is about allows you to be creative and also
thoughtful for the user yeah or the reader i should say i think it helps too because a lot
of tables i've seen go big on columns there's like quite a few there can be tons of columns
and so i think when you have like let's say you have a dozen columns if you have like two or three
spanners over them it feels easier it feels like closer to a table with three columns in a sense
started you kind of know what you're getting into so you can kind of ease into it yeah you kind of
zoom in by picking a spanner and then paying attention to those pieces or something yeah yeah
totally as well having these tools at your disposal as well also kind of like lets you be
like i said creative but also it gives you options to to explore different ways of creating a table
if you didn't have like the ability to put a spanner say in this program uh this python
library, you'd have to think of other ways. You'd have to, it, it basically changes your whole
presentation, not having options to do so. Right. You want to try to leverage color,
maybe to try to infer their group somehow, but then, yeah, so it's incomplete for sure.
Yeah. So a non, a non out in the audience asks, like there's a lot, R has lots of great examples,
but I've struggled since it's not equivalent in Python.
Let me suggest your tip.
I kind of feel like great tables is the entry point
for a lot of that, right?
What do you think?
Yeah, I think too, maybe something Rich you can hit on
is there's a lot to appreciate from the history of R.
Like it's really surprising to people
how hard people have gone on tables in R
and some of everything leading up to Rich working on GTNR,
tables in R in 2018.
There's actually like a 20 year history leading into that,
that maybe Rich, you can talk a bit about,
like kind of set the scope for what audiences.
So let me just add before you guys just jump in real quick.
You guys both are,
we didn't catch this in the introduction bits.
You're both working at Posit,
the company that created Shiny,
it was an absolute leader in R
and now has Shiny for Python
and all those kinds of things.
So just adding some background history for everyone.
Okay, go ahead.
Yeah, so basically R goes back probably about as far as Python, 90s or so.
But R seemed to have a head start on tables.
I mean, as far back as 2000, they had a LaTeX sort of table generating package.
And then in the innovating years, the decades since up to now,
they've had upwards of 8 to 10 table packages.
I think it had to do with the fact that data frames are just like, you know,
as part of the language.
So it just made sense to make a table.
And also they just had, I guess, a lot of tooling for creating PDFs,
especially for like package references.
So basically R has tons of like examples, vignettes and things like that.
Maybe not so much on the Python side.
We're trying to get that in, although I've been maximal on the table examples
for the R version of this, which is called GT.
haven't quite got there yet on the Python side.
So if you're seeing less examples,
then you might see on the R side,
make sure that they are coming soon.
Still working on it.
So let's talk about the Python side,
about what is my data journey
to get something into great tables
and then maybe what comes out of great tables.
So it starts with,
Sounds like data frame libraries.
What ones are supported?
How's that work?
What's the most ideal one?
Yeah, so we support out of the gate pandas and polars.
And we've made this engine lean pretty hard on polars in our examples
just because it has some kind of special moves
that work really well with great tables.
So for example...
Selectors and stuff, right?
Yeah, selectors.
So that really was eye-opening to us.
And I think the Polars team a little bit, I think they had it.
I think Great Tables was one of the first packages that went really hard in integrating with Polar Selectors as part of our API.
So if you want to set a spanner label, so you want to set a label over some columns, you can use Polar Selectors to do that in Great Tables.
And that's what we do all the time.
And it's really convenient. I think that that was kind of an early use of an external package for the Polars team using their selectors and stuff.
So we had a lot of communication with them about it early on.
But I would say so it takes a Pandas or a Polars data frame.
And we've leaned pretty hard into Polars just because of some of these really nice affordances.
If you go to the get started guide, you'll see it inside of selecting table parts and then selecting columns, I believe.
We have this little sidebar which sections up the getting started.
Oh, boy.
Okay, getting started.
Oh, if you go to the very bottom on the sidebar, so scroll down.
Gotcha.
Yeah, that.
Column selection.
So sorry.
There we go.
Yeah.
There's a whole using polar selector section.
Here we go.
Yeah.
So that's just an example of dropping polar selectors into the great table method to move certain columns to the beginning of the table.
Or you might do another example where you choose a number of columns to put a spanner over top of.
And they might be named in a systematic way, which is like the advantage here.
And you can do it for pandas as well.
Just not with selectors.
you just use lambdas and such to have similar functionality.
- Interesting, okay.
- Yeah, so yeah, pandas are pullers.
Pullers has some really nice benefits like selectors.
And then it also, it's used quite a bit
whenever we style a table,
we often use pullers expressions
to kind of target the areas to style.
So if you want to choose like for this column,
make the maximum value of the column yellow.
It's really easy with polar's expressions to say,
when this column is equal to the max value in itself.
- I see.
Yeah, that's really cool.
'Cause then you don't have to figure out what the max is
and then try to come up with a gradient range of it.
You just put it into little bits
or whatever, yeah?
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah, totally.
One thing I just noticed that's pretty sweet about this, actually,
is you already talked about the sources and the references
and things like that.
Yeah.
But I just noticed that you have markdown support
for your references.
Yeah, that's a good one.
Because sometimes you want to bold, italicize things,
maybe make a list within your footer, your source notes.
Yeah, sure.
I mean, even in the official way you're supposed to reference things,
there's stuff that's supposed to be italicized and stuff that's not right exactly yeah so you want
these tables to be useful for like wide range of people and if they didn't have that i don't know
what they would do they'd just use html i guess and try their best with tags but this is just an
easy obvious way to to make it simple yeah that's really great so we start with some data we load
it ideally into polars it sounds like but pandas is also supported and then you you kind of visually
i say visually the indentation of the way the code looks somewhat represents the structure of the
table um a little flutter or html-esque in that sense yeah yeah totally i think we think a lot
of it about in terms of three main activities structure format and style and we've tried to make
the method names match up a bit so everything starting with tab is basically about structuring
the table so that's those big pieces in the diagram we looked at whether it's setting the
title with tab title or tab header or um setting footnotes those are all structure activities so
So they all start with tab.
And then there's this just incredible bucket of formatters.
Rich really went ham on formatting methods.
So it's everything starting with FMT.
This is like, yeah, yeah.
This is like maybe you want to format the number of decimal places,
but Rich has gone even further to like,
maybe you want to put like a country flag in your table.
Rich has got you.
He wanted it to be easy for Country Flex, and I'm here for it.
Yeah.
Those little graphical elements are amazing for quickly conveying information,
kind of like the logo of the various universities that you would see on SportsCenter or whatever.
You're like, yeah, that's what I'm used to looking at.
Yeah, that's right.
You just use format image for that, and you just give it an image on disk or wherever, and it gets in there.
Yeah, and I was kind of confused why I was adding so many formatters at first, but I feel like the thing that really clicked for me is that if you think about, so if you go, actually, if you go up to the very top and then into the reference on the top bar, that will have lots of formatters under, yeah, they're just listed out.
So what clicked for me is that spreadsheet users, so people in Excel making a table, are really used to tons of convenient things like formatting dates.
You highlight a column, you press currency, then you press the move, the decimal point, two points to the left, they drop the portion, the partial ones and all that.
Yeah.
Yeah. So there is a world like the engineer in me thought like, oh, I kind of wish this wasn't our job to do all this formatting.
But I think Rich very intuitively picked up on like, well, if people use Excel for tables, I think you have to give them a compelling reason to be able to do it all in Python or they're not going to really want to make the jump.
And so I think having all these formatters is just a way of bringing that kind of nuts aspect of Excel into great tables.
And some of this stuff is tough and fiddly if you do it yourself.
I'm not just talking about simple format strings.
Can I do a colon and then a comma and then a 0.2 and we're done?
Yeah, first you got to do that.
And then there might be some other weird things.
We try to make it super simple with just some simple options, some arguments, and you're pretty much there.
Yeah, one thing I'll maybe give a shout out.
I know you talked about it, PyCon, was if you've got a bunch of numbers, like let's say it's currency,
you might want to format that using, like if it's over a million, 1.2M.
but if it's only 120,000, you might want to say 120 K.
Yeah.
Right.
Something where it's, yeah.
Or it uses sort of an abbreviator.
Yeah.
It's also useful if you have like tons and tons of numbers,
like a wall of numbers, you're running out of space.
So you just need to compactly.
And like the small figures don't really mean much.
Like you just want broad strokes.
Like it just can be the compact thing.
It's great.
And it works really well for like things where you don't need to have that
much precision.
still yeah you also seem to have taken a pragmatic approach where it's not like well you're not we're
not going to let you mix units in a column right if it's it's not you know kilometers and meters
like it's all kilometers it's all meters take it or leave it you know yeah yeah i think freedom
freedom baby that's what you want you can like you can target so we have like a column targeting
system but you can also like uh sort of like subset like what rows you want um so that's the
way so basically you can like format different ways down the column if you so choose to which
makes it more flexible yeah i think i think it goes back to to excel and you know excel's just
a big lump of clay you can just carve out your table however you want and it it does like do
formatting but it doesn't prescribe yeah like you said it doesn't constrain you to have to like do
it for a whole column and i think that's like we're endlessly surprised by the types of tables people
create and the things they communicate and in a way it's like leaving room for
surprise that yeah people are so creative you you want some constraints but you kind of
also want to let them surprise you with things you wouldn't think of but that end up being really
useful and i i don't doubt someone's there like mixing all kinds of things in ways i wouldn't
imagine but end up kind of working out i think it was like in our table contests where i was like
first surprised um basically we throw together table contests at posit it's such a nerdy thing
but like people submit tables and they get judged on them like they get prizes everyone's a winner
Rich is a very kind judge, to be sure.
It's like everybody wins in Rich's house.
Yeah.
But they're so good.
I see his tables.
I'm like, I never even thought of that.
That could be done.
You'd want to do that.
And I actually like it.
Like, yeah.
It's actually inspiring every time.
It's got to be pretty hard to build a framework around such visual flexibility, you know?
Yeah.
But still have something prescriptive, right?
Yeah, I guess the trick is just like have easy conveniences
just to do broad swaths of formatting and styling,
but also make it granular and give people power,
I guess you could say, along with simplicity.
Yeah, so tell people about these contests
if somebody wants to try their hand at great tables
and submitting something, you know.
I think we're even in the advent of code time,
and I guess we just had the hour of code stuff,
but there's a lot of these things where people are trying.
I just need some examples to play with to try to learn a thing, right?
Yeah.
So we do it in the summer, so not wintertime,
which is actually good for submissions.
Good.
So it's still coming up.
Yeah.
And we give a generous amount of time,
I think like two or three months, if I remember correctly.
But yeah, we just made the call.
It's like, submit your table.
We have a nice form.
And people submit them.
And we sometimes get up to 50, not 80 entries.
It's like we get quite a few.
And then we do the tough job of having a number of judges and just multiple judge grading of the tables.
And we had so many that we'd split them up into categories, right?
Because we were going to celebrate all these different types of tables.
And different domains have typically different types of tables.
And so it just makes sense to break it up in that way.
And I do, if I had to give advice, it's like much more freeform than a lot of the advent of code.
Because there's no target or even necessarily starting point, it could be really hard for some people, I think, to get started or figure out like, what could I do with this?
But I think if I had to give any advice, I think looking through the past entries is so helpful, like scanning past entries and even choosing some that inspire you.
And then whether you take data similar to those and maybe try to do something related or go in like a similar direction and look for new data, I think the existing entries are really, really inspiring.
Get the creative juices flowing, right?
You're like, oh, I didn't even think you could go down that direction.
Let's try that with my data.
Yeah, because I think if you start with just a blank page and you're kind of new even to great tables, it can be hard to know where to go.
But once you start looking at entries, I think you get a feel for all the kinds of things you can do with it.
Oh, that sounds great.
How important is it that you have interesting data to start with?
like hey let's grab the data that they use to image the first black hole try to make a cool picture
out of you know table picture out of that actually that's a great question i i think it really hits on
one of the neat things about these contests is that you don't have to have interesting data at
all actually one category of entry is kind of zany it's like recreating something that exists
in say like great tables or some other library like um rich and i were talking recently about
github issues so like we have issues are really exact interesting example of a table because
they're a table that software developers work with non-stop like i'm i'm all in those tables
all day and um it's it's like an interesting entry would just be to recreate that like if
you recreated GitHub issues in a table and it looked really spot on.
That's like its own kind of special accomplishment.
Like, and I think those entries are fun to see like someone recreate an existing thing
in great tables or something else.
So that, so yeah, to your point on data, I think you could start with even not having
to find interesting data, but find an interesting table out in the wild and just try to recreate,
recreate it. Yeah. So I don't know if this has anything to do with your contest or not,
but let me suggest an interesting angle to this in terms of like competitions for this,
just broadly for people who are listening. One is I've got really interesting data. I have a story
to tell and let me try to like really inspire you with my custom story. You know, if you look at
racing, like specifically auto racing. We've got F1 where everyone designs their own car. There are
some rules, but they kind of, they all have a thousand or 500 people that work on it. Then you've
got spec racing series, like Indy, where everyone has the same car, the same engine, or there's two
choices, whatever, same thing. And then they compete. So it would be interesting to have a
category that is like, this is the data you have to work with this, but tell a story. Like who could
tell the story the most interesting with like the same data, which sends a little bit Kaggle like,
I suppose. Yeah. Or tidy. Have you seen tidy Tuesday? Tidy Tuesday. Yeah. Tidy Tuesday. I think
it's exactly what you're describing. Every Tuesday, they release a data set. Yeah. And then people.
Oh, wow. It's very. There's a GitHub repo somewhere where they. Yeah. If you search for
TidyTuesday GitHub, you'll definitely find it. But essentially, yeah, it's just like data and
you're, you left your own devices about how to present it. It could be tables, plots, anything.
Yeah. I'm surprised the big Tidy Tuesdays, it's kind of a tricky one. There's a, I think there's
a Tidy Tuesday organization, but yeah, same data and yeah, people analyze it and then they share
it out on socials. Yeah. So you get to, I think exactly to your point, like you start from the
same place and you see where people get to and um i know like one our user dave robinson for a long
time would screencast himself live analyzing for an hour oh wow okay like what does it look like
for someone to analyze the data and i think that's a fun dimension too that you don't see often
like just how does it unfold like right what point does he plot and when does he go backwards
it's like the bob ross of of tables you know like the happy little trees come first and then this
and that oh that's how you make that picture okay right yeah yeah i mean like just yesterday i was
making new examples i'm surprised how long it takes to make a compelling example for a table
it's like yeah you have to mess with the data yeah and i will say this coffee table example that
Marco pointed out. So the coffee table example for people listening is an example table we created
where every row is a like coffee device. So it's the idea of this table is for like a fictional
coffee device shop. And every row is a coffee device. And then there are columns on like,
oh, how many did we sell? How much profit did we make? And then there's a nice little,
there's a column that's little bar charts um that show the monthly sales broken down and um
try hovering over one of those bars yeah yeah bars yeah so this is one of the things i wanted
to make sure that we got a chance to talk about because this is we've talked about having images
in here which is great and the what is this thing called that this group spanner i can only think
splitter i'm like no it's not it's groovy the spanners and the colors and stuff there but then
you have what in the framework is referred to as nanoplots right so that we already saw the bar
graph but that was just an example but here we've got like a little bar chart and rich as you point
out as i interact with it it's it's like a little plotly type thing like if i had if i were real
young and my eyes were real good i could read that i could even read the labels they're very small but
you have very little space so like i mean they're they're nano size that's why they're called that
they're not even microplots they're just nanoplots exactly a few instruments that's all we got here
let's go they're meant for html and meant to be lightweight slightly interactive um just to give
you a little something you know to to mouse over and to drill down they're massively important
because it shows you it's um i had stephanie stephanie mulling on a little while ago and she
has this project that sort of if you want the same information about the statistical summary
of some set of data like the standard distribution the mean the max the min and it could be like one
little blob or she has this thing will animate it into like a kangaroo or something and it's
it's got all the same information you have the same problem with tables here right like the
the total amount sold the percent sold but if you look at the nano plots some of them are really
spotty and some of them are pretty much flat and that it tells you a whole nother dimension that's
kind of this is kind of what i was getting at like you could make this multi-dimensional and
like that's another piece of communication that yeah isn't just you know rows and columns yeah it's
nice conversation too because each of those bars could very well be a column right i'm gonna have
like a january column all we have to yeah exactly yeah so it just shrinks it down and it's useful
instead of having a table and a plot yeah and you gotta like jump back and forth like it's
it emerges these two ideas in a pretty cool way yeah sort of explain the difference
yeah tables and plots i like too that with the nano plots like these little bar charts
maybe their job like in a lot of tables their job is to focus you onto a row like if you notice that
pattern's interesting it pulls you onto that record that row and then that lets you visit other
columns to see like supplemental information that maybe suggests what could be happening
or like gives you information to look up more as you're doing an analysis so it's kind of a neat
like visual pattern as a way to index onto interesting cases and then table columns have
the power to give you more information about these places also yeah that's cool it seems like because
you can put markdown into these pieces as well you could have them maybe jump to the full size plot
or something more more rich as you want to like kind of expand a row or something yeah totally
I think there are interactive table libraries too.
So one we have ported to Python recently is called Reactable.
So we made a port called Reactable Py that it offers expanding tables.
So if you're interested in a row, you can click it to expand down, say, like, more information or even a lot of, like, detail and description.
But I think to your point, yeah, that's a really neat possibility of being able to click and either be taken somewhere or have the table open up.
Yeah, that would be cool to have an inline capability.
Yeah.
I do want to note one thing about this table that I think about a lot is we, I'm so glad that Marco brought up it was useful because we spent a long time.
We spent, I think, a couple weeks creating this table.
And I talk about this with open source developers sometimes that I think about this, like how long we spent on this table, because this table's job was to illustrate like structuring, formatting and styling in like what should be like your first encounter with great tables.
And so we really, in a sense, as we created this table, we were on the hunt for a table that both introduced people to a range of activities, like looked nice, but also had code that we could explain.
and I it's like so hard I feel like as open source maintainers sometimes to find that like
right example like compelling shows off like a range of activities but also is approachable
and I do remember like Marco one thing that opened my eyes is he I think he shared this
table on LinkedIn once but he shortened it to like three or four rows and that I'm always really
interested in seeing those types of activities because i think that post really took off and it
i don't know it always like teaches me the power and the value of really like getting an
example down and getting it so it's interesting but also like short and compact it's like such a
art that some people are so good at yeah it's very cool we don't have much time left so i want to
focus on the last bit of this journey that data goes through with great tables. And that is
what happens, where does it go at the end? You know, like, what can I export? Yeah. So we talked
about HTML and this interactive bit, but what are the different places that you could send this to?
Well, I think the big ones are notebook. You're just iterating through some data and you want a
table maybe you want to present that as well so notebook is a really good example so maybe you
put that actually just in a cell and just as part of the notebook it just runs there yeah that's
right that's right another one is just like you want it somewhere else and maybe you want it in
a presentation you want a graphic so we have a facility for that it's the save method we just
like you get a image file or even a pdf from the table and sometimes you just want to take that html
and run with it somewhere else maybe embedded somewhere maybe put it inside of an email
uh so we have an as raw html uh method which gives you an html string that you can just like
pop in somewhere else nice and does that just give you like the worst possible html in the sense that
like every thing that has a color has a style set straight on it and stuff like that you have two
different stages you can have it like the style block that sort of like as a one div with the
table and the style block embedded or you can have all the styles in line which is a new feature which
is actually used for free emails yeah exactly because as much as you want to write nice stuff
yeah we can't have nice things because a lot of the email clients forbid you from putting styles
in there is no most notably gmail like if you put a stop even a solid style block it'll just throw
it away so you've got to just jam it onto everything if that thing can be bold it's in a
span it has you know style font weight bold on it you know when i first learned of that like years
ago because i'm in the email game as well i was like really how does this exist in this year but
it does it still exists um because of certain clients so yeah but luckily there's lots of like
great and we have it here too but there's lots of um people have developed libraries to to inline css
into tags yeah yeah yeah that's very purpose i guess one more output uh sorry uh is a little
attack right yeah it's the final destination yeah that's a new thing so you're writing a paper you
want a table in it we now have some way to to get the table if you want once you're yeah your
academic paper or your dissertation to have it like in it goes yeah sorry michael what were you
gonna say oh no i think one one interesting thing too is i think dot show we have a really great
contributor um ju young that prompted this i think because he was teaching a workshop to
vision impaired like data scientists and so dot show is handy to be able to call dot show and
have it open a browser with the table i think was like really useful and that that was so helpful
to have as a issue in um i think that contribution to great tables is really huge um yeah because
then a screen reader could read it exactly yeah yeah facility for that but also it's kind of
disappointing to work in the in the console and not have anything being shown it's like
so that's really good and it is i see carol noted uh quarto which is actually the
whole great tables website is built with quarto um and that's a nice format um so it uses a file
called a qmd which is a lot like markdown but it can run the code um and quarto is really convenient
for building things like websites or html reports and it's also developed by posit um but we yeah we
end up putting tables a lot in like quarter documents or the like great tables website yeah
and maybe it's too bashful to mention it but he developed like the library core doc which makes
makes this site possible and makes those tables rendered.
- Oh, that's awesome.
- Oh yeah, I guess for context,
so like some tools like IBIS,
their API docs and the great tables docs.
Yeah, we just created a small tool called Quarto doc
to let them put their like API references
in these websites so they can use Quarto.
- Yeah, that's excellent.
Yeah, very, very cool.
All right, well, I think we're pretty much out of time,
I guess give people a sense of where you're going,
like roadmap type stuff is anything
they should be looking out for.
- Yeah, I think we wanna port quite a bit more
from the R program over to great tables.
That includes things like merging,
concatenating values from different columns
into single columns, things about adding footnotes to tables.
So the footer is more put to better use
And more refinements to formatters and additional formatters.
There's quite a few more things to go, but even right now, it's pretty mature.
But there's probably things people will ask for that I haven't thought of.
So that's--
I think Anon is asking for Excel.
We'll put Excel in there, you know?
Yeah.
Yeah, I'll get to--
The snake will eat its own tail.
Excel's a big one.
And then we'll put great tables in Excel, so you can just go all the way to the bottom,
wherever that is.
well i think one other thing to note is extensions that in r tons of people have extended gt the
great tables for r and um tons of like helper packages like for like if putting a bar in your
table something you want to do there are like a lot of these inside extra helper packages and so
i think one nice thing would be we want to kind of create a like example helper package just to
to give a feel for how people in python could also create this kind of stuff for great tables if you
want to extend like yeah if you wanted to create your own bar chart little bar charts in great
tables that it seems like people have done a lot of that in r and so it'd be cool to try to
foster that kind of ecosystem and extension absolutely yeah that's awesome
all right well i'm gonna leave everybody with one parting thought and then i'll let you guys
give a final call to action you're looking at some of these examples especially those 10
ones that you called out rich that i'll link in the show notes like if you're doing a presentation
to your company on your blog as a data scientist
or just generally.
It's so easy, I think, to just have the tables
and then maybe somewhere you have a picture or something.
But if you put something together like that,
that will get people's attention straight away, right?
It's just really another level of production.
And the fact that you do it with Python
means it's reproducible.
You do it once and off it goes.
That's pretty excellent.
So if that sounds like something you all do, you should check out Great Tables.
It looks pretty excellent.
All right.
Yo.
Michael, give a final call to action.
People wanting to get started with Great Tables.
What do you tell them?
I, you know what?
Visit Great Tables, probably on GitHub, you know, check out the examples.
I think the examples are so, such a helpful way to get started.
And then if you get any questions at all, we have a Discord,
or we love hearing from people in the issues,
you know, we want to hear from you.
Read it all.
We consider it pretty, you know, pretty carefully.
Not carefully.
Awesome.
And then I think your point, like, style pays.
Like, you just got to churn out those beautiful tables, you know.
There's no other choice.
That's right.
I think also once you set up one of them,
if you kind of do similar types of tables,
Like you can reuse that code in a lot of ways.
So unlike doing it in a design or something.
All right, Rich, final word.
Final word.
Contribute.
Like if you want to, it's more of a call of action.
Just get into the site.
Discuss things with us.
Even if your idea is like way in left field,
we'll probably consider it and maybe even do it.
That's how eager we are to please when it comes to tables.
Awesome.
So PRs are accepted.
PRs, anything.
issues, complaints, whatever.
Beautiful.
All right.
Thanks for coming on the show, guys.
Yeah, thanks so much.
Yeah, congrats on the project.
See you later.
See you.
it.